# Mathematicians are chronically lost and confused (and that's how it's supposed to be)

A large part of my audience over at [Math ∩ Programming](http://jeremykun.com/)
are industry software engineers who are discovering two things about
mathematics: it's really hard and it opens the door to a world of new ideas. In
that way it's a lot like learning to read. Once you're mildly fluent you can
read books, use the ideas to solve problems, and maybe even write an original
piece of your own.

Many people who are in this position, trying to learn mathematics on their own,
have roughly two approaches. The first is to learn only the things that you
need for the applications you're interested in. There's nothing wrong with it,
but it's akin to learning just enough vocabulary to fill out your tax forms.
It's often too specialized to give you a good understanding of how to apply the
key ideas elsewhere. A common example is learning very specific linear algebra
facts in order to understand a particular machine learning algorithm. It's a
commendable effort and undoubtedly useful, but in my experience this route
makes you start from scratch in every new application.

The second approach is to try to understand *everything* so thoroughly as to
become a part of it. In technical terms, they try to *grok* mathematics. For
example, I often hear of people going through some foundational (and truly
good) mathematics textbook forcing themselves to solve every exercise and prove
every claim "left for the reader" before moving on.

This is again commendable, but it often results in insurmountable frustrations
and quitting before the best part of the subject. And for all one's desire to
grok mathematics, *mathematicians don't work like this!* The truth is that
mathematicians are chronically lost and confused. It's our natural state of
being, and I mean that in a good way. 

Andrew Wiles, one of the world's most renowned mathematicians, wonderfully
describes research like exploring a big mansion. 

> You enter the first room of the mansion and it’s completely dark. You stumble
> around bumping into the furniture but gradually you learn where each piece of
> furniture is. Finally, after six months or so, you find the light switch, you
> turn it on, and suddenly it’s all illuminated. You can see exactly where you
> were. Then you move into the next room and spend another six months in the
> dark. So each of these breakthroughs, while sometimes they’re momentary,
> sometimes over a period of a day or two, they are the culmination of, and
> couldn't exist without, the many months of stumbling around in the dark that
> precede them.

Wiles discusses what it's like to do mathematical research here, but I'd argue
that the same analogy largely holds for *learning* mathematics. 

If you're going to get anywhere in learning mathematics, you need to learn to
be comfortable not understanding something. Speaking with experienced
mathematicians, and reading books written by them, almost always feels like the
following sketch about math class as imagined by kids (clicking the image will
send you to Youtube). 

[![kidmath.png](https://svbtleusercontent.com/aybju2ybufm6yw_small.png)](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KdxEAt91D7k)

Aside from being absolutely hilarious, the video has a really deep and probably
unintentional truth, that the more mathematics you try to learn the more you
feel like the poor student! The video especially resonates when, toward the
end, the teacher asks, "Do you get it now?" and the student pauses and slowly
says, "Yes." That 'yes' is the fledgling mathematician saying, "I obviously
don't understand, but I've accepted it and will return to it later (maybe)."

I've been in the students' shoes a thousand times. Indeed, if I'm *not* in his
shoes at least once a day then it wasn't a productive day! I say at least a
dozen stupid things daily and think countlessly many more stupid thoughts in
search of insight. It's a rare moment when I think, "I'm going to solve this
problem I don't already know how to solve," and there is no subsequent crisis.

But I'm comfortable in my discomfort. This is something that has been bred into
me after years of studying mathematics. I know how to say, "Well, I understand
nothing about anything," and then constructively answer the question, "What's
next?" Sometimes the answer is to pinpoint one very basic question I don't
understand and try to tackle that first. Other times it's to learn what I can
and move on.

I had a conversation with an immensely talented colleague, a PhD candidate at
UM Ann Arbor and a far more talented mathematician than I, in which she said (I
paraphrase),

> If I spend an entire day and all I do is understand this one feature of this
> one object that I didn't understand before, then *that's* a great day.

We all have to build up our insights over time, and it's an often slow and
arduous process. In Andrew Wiles's analogy, my friend is still in the dark
room, but she's feeling some object precisely enough to understand that it's a
vase. She still has no idea where the light switch is, and the vase might give
her no indication as to where to look next. But if piece by piece she can
construct a clear enough picture of the room in her mind, then she will find
the switch. What keeps her going is that she knows enough little insights will
lead her to a breakthrough worth having. 

And it's not even like one needs to understand every piece of a mathematical
argument to have *some* useful insight about it. Sometimes I will just accept
some detail of an argument and focus on the bigger picture, and other times the
big picture will be completely mysterious and I will focus on the details. The
math isn't going anywhere. I can always come back to it, and it can often
happen that one particular detail doesn't hinder my insights (as you do more
mathematics, insights come on a bigger and bigger-picture scale). 

So, dear reader aspiring to grok linear algebra or calculus or any mathematical
subject, I suggest you don't worry too much about verifying every claim and
doing every exercise. If it takes you more than 5 or 10 minutes to verify a
"trivial" claim in the text, then you can accept it and move on. Thinking about
other problems in the mean time is a healthy way to clear your mind, and even
better is working with a friend. Sure, sometimes you can't get away without
working out every detail. Sometimes you just have to bang your head against a
wall for an hour to get through the really important theorems. But more often
than not you'll find that by the time you revisit a problem you've literally
grown so much (mathematically) that it's trivial. 

What's much more useful is recording what the deep insights are, and storing
them for recollection later. Because every important mathematical idea has a
deep insight, and these insights are your best friends. They're your
mathematical "nose," and they'll help guide you through the mansion.
