# The competing incentives of academic research in mathematics

2015-10-17

Alexander Coward is a lecturer of mathematics at UC Berkeley. The other day he
posted [a long article](http://alexandercoward.com/BlowingTheWhistleOnUCBerkeleyMathematics.html) on his website denouncing the UC Berkeley mathematics
department for their (alleged) misguided reasons in firing him.

There are a lot of moving parts in this particular story, but Dr. Coward’s
central claim is that he’s being fired for teaching too well and making the
rest of the department look bad. He has some evidence to back up his claims.
But even despite the fact that the university is free to fire and hire whomever
they want for whatever reason they like — in particular, it has always been and
will always be a fireable offense to piss of your boss (if you don’t have
tenure) — this story highlights the strange role that academic mathematics
research has grown into over the past half century.

Whether Dr. Coward likes it or not, research mathematicians at research
universities have no incentive to teach undergraduates well. Every aspect of
their career incentivizes them to neglect teaching:

1. Their status as a researcher is solely based on the quality of their work
   and the degree to which they convince other researchers to study it.
2. Their job advancement (from graduate student to postdoc to assistant
   professor to tenured professor) is based solely on the quality and quantity
   of their academic research.
3. Mathematicians who put too much emphasis on teaching (or took time off from
   research to teach) are often not offered jobs for fear they will focus on
   teaching instead of research.
4. Because grants are judged by the same community of peers that decides
   whether to hire you, grant money is also purely dependent on research
   quality.
5. Decisions about tenure are unrelated to teaching.
6. If you spend less time preparing lectures and meeting with students, you
   have more time for research.

On the surface there are checks to counteract this, but they are all
superficial. Job applicants are expected to provide a “teaching statement,” but
nobody reads it. If someone does read it, it has no bearing on the final
decision. Likewise, grants expect a discussion of “wider impact” and
inclusivity of broader groups, but the game there is to find a way to “launch”
a program for helping minority students which coincides with your regular
advising of graduate students. Because, and you seen this coming, graduate
students have the potential to do good research with you and doing research is
what matters. In other words, it’s not hard to game the system because the
people who matter in the system also only care about research.

University administrators (desperately looking for reasons to justify their own
jobs) often require faculty to submit teaching evaluations of themselves or
their peers, but as far as anyone knows they go into a wastebasket after some
cursory statistics are gathered for use in a report that nobody will ever read.
And for what it’s worth a research university administrator’s job is also not
related to providing good teaching. Their job is to maximize revenue from
tuition, donors, and arbitrary student fees. And that works by building nice
gyms, sports centers, cafeterias, and comfortable student housing. That’s what
attracts students and allows them to hide the myriad of fees and tuition spikes
inside a litany of boring legalese. Administrators don’t care about the actual
education their students are getting because to them the university is a
business and teaching quality is unrelated to their bottom line . That is, in
the short to medium to not-so-long term; if in fifty years people finally start
to realize they can get a better education outside research universities (if
the “bubble bursts” so to speak) then the folks at Berkeley will start to
rethink their greedy optimizations.

So the university administrators don’t care, and the researchers are
incentivized not to care. But to the public everyone is saying they do care and
that education is their top priority.

I’m not trying to make a value judgement about universities or researchers or
administrators. I personally enjoy teaching in general, and think it can be
really exciting when the environment is set up to allow efficient use of the
professor’s and students’ time. All I’m doing is observing incentives that
partially explain the current state of the world. The real question that needs
answering is what the role of a research university should be. And it seems
there are two competing answers.

The first is that a research university should primarily be a place where
top-notch research gets done that impacts the world. In this case the current
state of the world is as good as it can be: we have lots of great people doing
great work, universities only hire those with research talent who won’t waste
their energy teaching students. Administrators and PR departments have
convinced (a.k.a. tricked) the world into thinking that the average student who
attends University X can get a great education by absorbing the radiation
emanating from geniuses (and the hope that some small fraction of them can
become great geniuses, too). So there is enough cash flow coming in to support
researcher salaries when grant money is scarce. What the students actually do
during their time at the university is irrelevant so long as researchers keep
outputting great research, and if the students want an education it’s their
responsibility to read the textbooks.

This is a rather cynical view of education, and I think most people’s first
knee-jerk reaction to this is that it’s evil. But the more I think about it the
more this stance seems like an onion, and the more layers you peel the less
outrageous it seems.

The first fact is that university attendance is skyrocketing. Every year
millions more students go to college, and every middle class US teenager has
the “college track” ingrained in their psyche. And it’s only getting worse,
just the other day I overheard a woman say she was putting her child in a
lottery for kindergarten. Parents are preparing their students for college
before they can even read!

The obvious foundational question is whether every student should go to
college. And I think the answer is obviously no. A close friend of mine who
I’ll call Navid hated school growing up. He absolutely hated it. By junior year
Navid was skipping class so often that I thought he had switched schools or
dropped out. In fact, he did drop out, and then later got his GED and found out
he liked working with machines. So Navid went to a cheap two-year mechanic
training program, started working as a mechanic for luxury cars, realized that
when you learn to fix fancy cars you can basically fix anything, and then he
got a job traveling the country repairing turbines. He has a comfortable life,
no debt, a nice car, and he was doing this before I could even finish
undergrad.

Then you have the thousands of students with degrees in art history and
philosophy and anthropology and drama who end up waiters and baristas and
flight attendants and sales clerks, and they’re unhappy because nobody seems to
want to pay them to philosophize or critique art. And for what it’s worth
they’ve never tried fixing a machine in their life, so they wouldn’t have any
chance to tell whether they enjoy it. They even brag about how little they
understand about their computer (which turns out to be the only tool they use
to do any work). But they like how structured school is and if you just follow
the directions and draw within the right lines you’ll get an A and … profit,
right?

So from the university’s perspective they’re just reacting to natural market
forces. If there’s a businessperson who realizes city X doesn’t have any good
gyms and builds the best gym, we don’t criticize them just because gym-goers
are bad at maintaining their commitments to their health. It’s their fault: all
the workout machines are there, there are plenty of colleagues to go to the gym
with, most people are just lazy and don’t want to expend effort. It’s not evil
to make a profit off of that fact, is it? The same logic holds for people who
aren’t committed enough to their education. If you’re opposed to universities
who expect their students to work hard, you must also be opposed to gym owners.

Now you might say, “Thank goodness that wasn’t me! I was very dedicated to my
education.” Really? When you took calculus, did you read the textbook as the
class progressed? If not, then the university was taking advantage of your
laziness. Regardless of your self-esteem, your mindset was that you would go to
lecture and that it was the professor’s job to teach you what you need to know.
That is how the university takes advantage of your laziness.

One important counter is that universities are cramming people into larger and
larger classes, which makes it very difficult to interact with the professor
even if you’re the best student. Shouldn’t the classroom be a place where, if
you have done the reading, you can go to ask questions on the parts that were
difficult and have a genius explain them to you with dazzling clarity?

That would be ideal, but once this thing is a business the question is what
product are you paying for? In this case it’s the lecture (since the assumption
is now that most students don’t read the book) and the diploma. Just like the
gym analogy, if you want interaction you need to find friends who can help you,
or hire a personal trainer. So the University might reasonably argue by putting
more people in the classroom they’re giving you a larger community of students
you can work with. And they also pay for personal trainers (graduate students)
to run discussions and hold office hours and run tutoring centers.

All the while your tuition and future debt pays for researchers to do great
research. So where’s the problem? Lazy people will have bad job opportunities
and be in debt because it’s their own fault, motivated people will learn and
find summer internships and do projects outside of class and start businesses
with their classmates. The only problem is that someone (who?) convinced the
average student that they belong in college when they simply don’t.

The second answer to “What should a university be?” is that it should be a
place to train students who then go out into the world and do great things. The
glaring problem with this view is that it’s mutually exclusive with research.
For every faculty member a university hires whose sole job is to teach, they
lose a faculty member who can do research (and all the graduate students and
grant money and prestige that comes with that).

But fine, let’s take this train of thought to the extreme and suppose that
there was no more research at universities. At least in pure mathematics, this
would likely destroy all research efforts period. As far as I’m aware there are
no research jobs for pure mathematics outside of academia. There are lots of
applied math research jobs, but they are almost entirely in government labs on
mathematical modeling. There is some small amount of weather modeling, but
mostly weapons design, counter-terrorism computational science, and NSA efforts
to circumvent the cryptography ensuring your communications are private. Data
science and statistics jobs in practice are generally not research.

[Mathematicians
estimate](http://mathoverflow.net/questions/5485/how-many-mathematicians-are-there)
there are around 30k research mathematicians currently working in the United
States. And at a conservative salary of $60k per year (this is really more like
a high postdoctorate salary) their salaries are 1.8 billion USD in total. On
the other hand, the National Science Foundation, Department of Defense, and
Department of Energy, the main government funders of pure math research, spend
no more than 500 million a year on all math research grants (pure and applied).
Meaning without universities to fund mathematicians, we’d be able to fund at
most 8,500 mathematicians in the US. That’s just over a quarter of what we have
now. Are we really willing to sacrifice the sort of foundational advancements
in science that mathematicians tend to usher in for the sake of getting better
teachers to train lazy students?

And this is just math, what about biology, physics, chemistry, engineering, and
all of the other (much larger and more expensive!) fields that also have
limited funding from the government. Maybe industry would step in and hire them
to do long-term foundational research, but industry labs these days are known
to be
[fickle](http://j2kun.svbtle.com/what-microsoft-lost-when-it-closed-msr-silicon-valley).
More likely, their skills will end up going to endeavors that are practical,
but not earth-shattering. Like making slightly more efficient file systems, or
the next mobile chat app, or designing better medical devices for diagnosing
illnesses in pets. I hear pet care is a lucrative market.

This second view about the role of a university is one I can’t morally support
until there is viable large-scale funding for research outside of academia. I’m
convinced there is a business model that can sustain research better than
academia can. I just don’t know what it is yet. But if a student wants a top
notch education and they can’t afford to go to a private liberal arts college
where they actually care about teaching, the best option is to find the
cheapest state polytechnic school where, even if you’re lazy, you’re forced to
get your hands dirty and learn a skill. Because Dr. Coward’s ranting and
whistleblowing isn’t going to change the incentives of the Berkeley math
department. The foundation of Berkeley’s business is too sturdy for anyone to
care. Oh, and they’re not incentivized to care, because there’s that research
that needs doing.

So is there some sort of middle ground that universities can have between all
research and no research? Some universities have been trying, but then you get
friction between teaching and research faculty over where to devote resources,
students stop signing up for the classes taught by the research professors,
people start wondering why we keep the researchers around anyway, and the
Alexander Cowards of the world come along and try to ignite the gunpowder.

It seems like when researchers are in charge the only stable state is “all
research,” and when educators are in charge the only steady state is “no
research.” There doesn’t seem to be a middle ground. However, industry does
seem to be poking their heads back through the research door in a good way.
YCombinator (one of the country’s biggest tech investment firms) is launching a
[new research lab](https://blog.ycombinator.com/yc-research) and investing a
lot of money in it. Hell, I’ll even apply for a job there if they announce a
group that aligns with my research interests.  I’ll be very interested to see
how they make it profitable, or whether the lab will become the rich venture
capitalist’s plaything until they get tired of funding it and close it down.
