# The Dog Singularity

2016-01-22

This may shock you, but dogs—yes, our lovable furry “friends”—are on track to
become super-intelligent beings. This gives rise to an imminent threat. When
dogs realize they don’t need humans anymore, they could easily eliminate us.

Progress toward a dog singularity has been accelerating exponentially in the
last two decades. Don’t take it from me, let’s examine the mounting evidence.

Dogs manipulate us on a daily basis. They drive wild mood swings, making us
ecstatic or devastated, enraged or frightened, simply by baring their teeth,
tilting their head, or wagging their tails. And all of this can be done by a
single dog! Contrast that with the recent debacle over Facebook, a corporation
with around 10,000 employees and millions of engineer-hours, [manipulating
users’ news
feeds](http://www.nytimes.com/2014/06/30/technology/facebook-tinkers-with-users-emotions-in-news-feed-experiment-stirring-outcry.html?_r=0)
to get a barely-measurable change in moods. Dogs don’t seem so innocent
anymore.

A dog already has intelligence [far
beyond](http://www.cbsnews.com/news/how-smart-is-your-dog-60-minutes/) what
scientists currently understand. [Brian
Hare](https://evolutionaryanthropology.duke.edu/people/brian-hare), an
evolutionary anthropologist at Duke University, explains:

> We’re not talking about stupid pet tricks. [Dogs can learn] tons, literally,
> thousands of new things by using the same ability that kids use when they
> learn lots of words.

Scientists are only beginning to understand the limit of dog intelligence, but
according to John Piley, a psychology professor, dogs have cognitive
capabilities at least as powerful as “a two-year-old” human.

Many would balk at the idea that dog intelligence is less critical to
understand than machine intelligence. But there are many broad categories of
general intelligence that dogs have become increasingly good at mastering,
while the world’s best machines remain inertly incompetent.

Take for example, Baron, an average German shepherd, who demonstrates a mastery
of so-called “transfer learning,” taking a concept from one domain and
transferring it to another.

![Spring cleaning with Baron the German
Shepherd](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lPeLAkafz1c)

Compare this to the world’s best robot towel folder.

![World's best towel folding
robot](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gy5g33S0Gzo)

That’s right, it takes the world’s most powerful robots over twenty minutes to
fold a single towel.

Dogs can do laundry, [make
coffee](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cslAEBFowdI), mimic human behavior with
alarming accuracy, recognize faces with long-term recall, plan and execute
complex strategies, and understand the semantic meaning of thousands of words.
These are all modes of learning computers are only beginning to scratch the
surface of. And this is not to mention that dogs are already exponentially more
powerful than humans in terms of [sight, speed,
smell](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=K8nq3eRCSMQ), hearing,
[balance](https://youtu.be/q8FfNQ_E0l0?t=1m34s), reaction time, and many other
domains. How long before dogs replace entire industries and make all of our
decisions for us? The threat of dogs is real.

But the manipulation doesn’t stop at our moods. Dogs also have a huge influence
over public policy. The American Disabilities Act requires most businesses and
government offices to allow service animals wherever the public has access. And
the most common service animal is, you guessed it, the dog. While the US has
soaring rates of PTSD ([almost one in five
veterans](http://www.facethefactsusa.org/facts/the-true-price-of-war-in-human-terms))
and disability ([almost one in four adult
americans](http://apps.npr.org/unfit-for-work/)), almost nobody is mentioning
the potentially sinister influence of dogs. Because who stands to gain the
most? Service dogs get deeper access to human decision making, “guiding” them
to subtly increase the dog’s autonomy and control. We have also admitted that
dogs are pretty much [the only way we’ll pay
attention](https://youtu.be/fJ9prhPV2PI?t=1m32s) to some of the most important
developments in our society.

There are countless multimillion- and multibillion-dollar businesses oriented
solely around dogs. The total amount spent by Americans on dogs in 2015 alone
is estimated to be around $30 billion USD, and it’s been steadily growing
faster than inflation year over year for as long as we have data. If these
increases continue (and every projection says they will), we’ll soon be
spending the majority of the nation’s GDP on dogs. Once dogs steal our economy
from under our noses, will we finally admit their super-human intelligence?

One might argue: dogs obviously don’t have super-human intelligence; they can’t
write novels that make us cry or infer the meaning of indirect grammatical
references using only the context of human experience.

Let’s put aside the obvious critique that “intelligence” is a fluid idea,
hardly well defined by any measure, and dogs could still have super-human
intelligence despite not being able to properly parse a sentence no human would
ever have reason to say. (In fact, super-intelligence might require not being
limited by quibbles over the ambiguities of inefficient human language!)
Because even if dogs don’t currently have a capacity for super-intelligence,
that doesn’t mean it’s theoretically impossible. In fact, our existence and the
theory of evolution provides the proof of concept that the dog singularity can
occur. Humans originally had the intellectual capacity comparable to dogs, and
in the blink of an evolutionary eye we developed the world we see around us. In
fact, the only evidence we have—that intelligent species evolve to become more
intelligent—points to the immediacy of the dog singularity.

It might not happen tomorrow. It might not happen in ten years. But when it
does happen, the dog singularity will be the single biggest existential threat
to humanity.

We are currently doing almost nothing to address this monumental threat. A
select few US cities and states have taken measures to avoid the dog
singularity. For example, in [Hartford
Connecticut](http://www.dogwatch.com/dogtails/2012/10/15/strange-dog-laws/),
it’s illegal to educate your dog. And in Oklahoma, dogs must have a signed
permit to congregate in parties of three or more on private property. These are
baby steps, but it’s important that more politicians step forward to address
this largely ignored issue. If you care about the future of the human race,
you’ll write your congressman, donate to nonprofits dedicated to curtailing dog
autonomy, and attend the growing number of “dog singularity” and “canine
futurist” meet-ups across the country.

It’s clear that we need to be very careful. When training and playing with our
dogs, we are essentially summoning the demon. You might be relatively sure you
can control your dog, but if you can’t the consequences could be extreme. We
can’t know exactly what will happen when dogs exceed our intelligence. We might
be infinitely helped or ignored by it, or conceivably destroyed. But in any
event, if we don’t keep a watchful eye and react swiftly to new development, we
are putting ourself at risk of extinction.
