# If you're going to treat education like a business, then follow the right business model!
2013-12-30

I heard a story recently on NPR where they discussed the effectiveness of job
incentives. They recalled a case study that's very familiar to anyone who pays
attention to these sorts of stories. The basic idea was that a company gave
rewards to their best employees based on performance (it was sales, I believe),
and it caused people to be selfish and competitive. When they removed the
incentives, their employees started to work together, and resulted in a drastic
increase in total sales. 

There are a host of other stories like this. My old team at Amazon had the
policy that you choose your own hours, so long as you get your work done.
Google famously gives employees 20% of their working hours to pursue their own
ideas for possible innovations and improvements to the company, and these ideas
have translated into some of their best products. Even Microsoft, the dinosaur
of tech companies, has realized it needs to ditch its [competitive business
framework](http://techcrunch.com/2013/11/12/microsoft-ditches-its-employee-ranking-system-for-someting-more-kumbaya-less-internally-destructive/)
in favor of something that promotes more innovation and success.

**The message that pervades all of these discussions is this: learn to hire
great people, and let them do whatever it is they need to do to make great
things happen.**

Unfortunately there's one industry that apparently has yet to hear of this:
education. My own personal view is that education (elementary through college)
shouldn't be treated like a business, but for all intents and purposes it is.
The profit metrics might be test scores, diplomas, the size of a sports
program, or research papers, but it's business all the same.

But with public school teacher protests, asphyxiating testing standards, and
the nuisance of [snowplow
parents](http://thestir.cafemom.com/big_kid/151554/7_signs_you_might_be), this
raises an obvious question. If we're intent on treating education like a
business, why aren't we using a model that we know works? In other words, why
don't we simply

1. Find great teachers
2. Pay them well
3. Let them do what they need to do to teach

If business tells us anything, it tells us that market forces will attract
qualified people. In other words, the administrators are there to attract great
teachers and give them the resources and support they need to make great
education happen.

It may seem like I'm oversimplifying things (of course I am, there are so many
other issues), but it's clear from the news and the protests and the teachers I
know that this attitude is only present at the most blessed of institutions.

So my question to you is: why doesn't education work this way? Should I chalk
it up to incompetence? To inertia? To the greed of the people in charge? Are
there just "bigger problems" in most schools? A little bit of all of it? Or is
it that this model doesn't work for education?

At least, I think it's an important discussion to have.
