# Nobody needs to learn to code, but everybody can learn to code
2013-12-10

Barack Obama recently released a
[video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6XvmhE1J9PY) encouraging American
students to learn to write programs. [A lot of people have discussed
this](https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=6875842) in recent years, and the
general consensus seems to be that not everyone should become a *software
engineer*. 

I totally agree with this. Writing good software is hard work, requires a lot
of experience, and there's enough poorly written software out there. The world
doesn't need more halfway-trained software engineers who think they know what
they're doing causing errors that cost everyone else time and money and
potentially lives. 

This is even true of extremely smart and talented people. I encounter
scientists all the time who share "data" in formats entirely unusable to anyone
but themselves. Why is this? Because they simply haven't struggled enough with
software and others' data to know the right and wrong ways to do it. And more
importantly they don't care; research is their business, not data. Same goes
for engineers: they don't care about producing reusable test suite frameworks,
they care about getting a working prototype into production. It's their
*job* to cut inconsequential corners when it comes to software, even if it
infuriates the rest of us (I mean come on, just look at Matlab! Okay, okay,
I'll keep the personal gripes to a minimum).

All of this opposition to learning to code is beside the point. The goal is not
to make everyone dedicate their lives to computer science (though that would
make me very happy). The point is not even to get people to think about problem
solving or to promote computer literacy, even though these are good reasons to
learn a bit of coding. Forget about our changing society and the Economy of
Ideas.

The reason that the president of the United States felt it necessary to promote
programming to his country is because **programming is the new American
Dream.** Most of the responses ignored this central message of Obama's video,
or entirely misunderstood how different programming is from the old American
Dream.

What was the old Dream? That anyone could, with enough elbow grease and
determination, grow a successful business from nothing. It's still a thing
today, but whether *anyone* can do it is a hard sell because there are so much
is beyond immediate control. Available locations, supply chains, finding the
right employees, natural disaster, effective advertising are all huge concerns.
But more: your race, gender, age, socioeconomic class, and immigration status
all can make or break a business.

Now consider programming. It doesn't matter if you're low-class, gender
creative, fresh off the boat, or a neo-nazi. It doesn't matter if you're ten
years old or seventy, if you are a hermit or a social butterfly, or if you live
in the city or the country. If you have access to a computer and an internet
connection (even if it's just at a library) and you're determined enough, you
can learn to program. You might not become the next Don Knuth, and you might
only make an iPhone app that flops. But short of incarceration or the sort of
destitution where you struggle to feed yourself, the opportunity is there for
anyone to take. Nobody claims it's a panacea. Programming won't solve
homelessness or crime or even make our legislators more intelligent. But it's a
chance, and that's what the American Dream is all about. 

Programming is not like "becoming a car mechanic," though writers not familiar
enough with software will claim this. In fact, it's much more difficult than
becoming a car mechanic; software is more like an engine where any tiny failure
causes the entire car to explode. And knowledge about how to repair an engine
is nothing like being able to design an engine that has never been built before
and then build it. Indeed, writing good software is more like architecture and
much more eternal. Even simple programs are monoliths that depend on thousands
of components and tens of layers of abstraction. While the industry may change,
programs themselves do not deteriorate over time. That's why banks still run
Fortran code from the 50's. Hurricanes and financial crises can't destroy
programs. [Politics can't kill your life's
work](http://www.kickstarter.com/projects/ladar/lavabits-dark-mail-initiative).
Even if a business based on a particular piece of software fails, you still
have the software and can do what you please with it.

But compared to other trades that require physical supplies and training and
luck, learning to code is more accessible, cheaper, and more attractive as a
chance to make a name for yourself than politics or the movie industry or
anything else. People like me who love computer science for its own sake might
hate this idea. That logic incarnate, something so beautiful in its cold
austerity with mysteries and surprises and delights beyond counting, is reduced
to a gamble or investment for financial success. But that's how the world is. 

So no, for the sake of my favorite discipline I will cry that nobody *needs* to
learn to code. But that doesn't change the fact that anyone *can* learn to
code. Programming is as close to an equalizer as the world has to offer. And as
such, any politician *not* promoting the availability of computer science
education resources and internet access (for anyone, not just students), is
entirely unAmerican.

*Jeremy Kun is a graduate student in Mathematics and Computer Science at the
University of Illinois at Chicago. He's the writer of the blog [Math âˆ©
Programming](http://jeremykun.com/), where he explores the interesting ways
that mathematics and computer science interact.*
