# What would math class look like if it were a fine art?

2014-02-21

Wahoo Public High School in Wahoo, Nebraska is by all accounts a school with
ample opportunities for their students. They have the standard array of
English, history, and science courses, with enough money left over for band,
drama, fine arts, many sports teams, and a couple of *very* surprising
electives (zoology, web design, and fashion design to name a few, see their
current [curriculum
guide](http://www.wahooschools.org/vimages/shared/vnews/stories/4c7d6322ac020/%20WHS%20Curriculum%20Guide%202013-14%20for%20web.pdf)
for the whole list). 

And Wahoo HS has given some truly unique opportunities for their students to do
things like [watch a live heart
surgery](http://www.wahooschools.org/vnews/display.v/ART/4f8d9c12d4191) and
[visit the video control
room](http://www.wahooschools.org/vnews/display.v/ART/5273b5cba467c) of the
Ralston Arena event center. Wahoo seems to treat its teachers right, too: in
2008 they [sent a group of teachers to
DC](http://www.wahooschools.org/vnews/display.v/ART/48ab176d81830) to learn
more about its history.

I don't bring all this up just to praise Wahoo HS for its quality (though they
clearly deserve praise), but also to use it as a platform for a thought
experiment: what would math class look like if it were considered a fine art
instead of a science? The claim that this even makes sense is a common one from
mathematicians. They say that doing mathematics involves a lot more creativity
than is present in the majority of high schools, and it's a disservice to
students to misguide them as to what mathematics is all about by focusing on
memorizing facts. A good school like Wahoo gives us a nice platform to explore
the possibilities.

Let's start by comparing two Art and Math courses at WHS by their respective
syllabi. The first is [Pre-calculus with
trigonometry](http://homepages.math.uic.edu/~jkun2/education/syllabi/WHS-pre-calc-syllabus.pdf),
and the second is [Art
1](http://homepages.math.uic.edu/~jkun2/education/syllabi/WHS-art-syllabus.pdf).
These syllabi seem to be
[standard](http://www.wahooschools.org/vnews/display.v/SEC/High%20School%7CCourse%20Syllabi)
as far as course syllabi go at WHS.

Though the syllabus is a minuscule part of the learning experience in a class,
they do give insight into the attitudes of the administration and/or the
teachers. I want to highlight the attitudes of the art class, which is more or
less what one expects from an art class. The syllabus states a student only
needs a pencil, eraser, and a creative mind (sounds familiar to
mathematicians). The stated "philosophy" of the course is to be "free and
creative" while having the opportunity to try a variety of media and understand
the principles of design. Here are the grading standards for Art 1:

[![art1-grading
standard](https://svbtleusercontent.com/tokxqg9hcdpscw_small.png)](https://svbtleusercontent.com/tokxqg9hcdpscw.png)

Note the key words: originality, creativity, and "piece of work." It's clear
that this class is about creating something that displays your understanding of
craft and technique. 

The math class, on the other hand, begins with this list of expectations:

[![precalc
syllabus](https://svbtleusercontent.com/0axx5rahwncqa_small.png)](https://svbtleusercontent.com/0axx5rahwncqa.png)

"Be prepared," "demonstrate proficiency," and "respond appropriately." The
effect is clear: **math is careening toward you and you should brace for
impact.** The syllabus continues by outlining an exact day count to spend on
each topic throughout the year, ranging from "analytic trigonometry" (15 days)
to "practice for ACT and NeSA test" (10 days). No opportunities, no
exploration, no originality or creativity. You must memorize and practice to
meet standards and prepare for a college course you are unlikely to need or
use. 

This course follows the same path that most high school trigonometry courses
follow. And if it is taught in the same way that mine was (and I went to a
comparably well-off public school), then even the best students leave
pre-calculus with plenty of rapid-fire mechanical skill but without *doing*
much mathematics, if any. This is what many think develops critical thinking
skills, but it is unfortunately the mathematical analogue of memorizing dates
in history (useful, but far from the core of historical analysis). In fact,
most mathematicians have relatively poor mechanical abilities. Fine details are
something that we accept takes time and deliberation to get right, and I
personally save it for the quiet days where I can devote a few hours to
crossing all my t's (and after recording the details, I promptly forget them).

Before I go on I want to make something clear: I'm *not* blaming the teacher of
this course. I imagine whoever teaches this pre-calculus course busts his or
her ass off six days a week to get these kids to learn *anything.* The teacher
is probably so beleaguered by students, administrators, tests, and standards,
that we can expect little else. No, my problem is not with the dedicated
teacher, but with the content and organization that has been undoubtedly
imposed on them. It's not hard to find specific examples. Lacking a directive
to force feed students information about secant, cosecant, and cotangent, every
sane math teacher would completely obliterate them from the menu. They were
invented as a shorthand for navigation books hundreds of years in the past and
have yet to find a reason to be in our classrooms. 

What constitutes a good mathematical curriculum is a whole can of worms I don't
want to open right now, because it would detract form the purpose of this
thought experiment: to see what math class would be like if it were treated as
a fine art. Indeed, I posit that most issues with dense, overwhelming,
pointless curricula would be completely bypassed in the scenario I am about to
propose!

But before I do, the reader needs to understand that mathematics is not about
factoring polynomials or computing derivatives. Mathematics is first and
foremost about crafting arguments to explain why patterns behave the way they
do. This is also known as the process of conjecture and proof, though the word
    "proof" in high school mathematics has been largely hijacked to mean
    something different. If we as a society value "mathematical thinking
    skills" and want to teach that to our students, then we absolutely *must*
    make conjecture and proof the primary focus of secondary school mathematics
    education. And there is no precise formula one can follow to find beautiful
    proofs. They must be discovered (often with a lot of random guessing and
    mistakes), and revised until they are as pristine and logically airtight as
    one can make them. Mathematicians understand this at a deep level; it is a
    personal journey that doubles as weightlifting for your brain. As Paul
    Lockhart writes addressing the beginning mathematics student,

> What makes a mathematician is not technical skill or encyclopedic knowledge
> but insatiable curiosity and a desire for simple beauty. Yes, your ideas
> won't work. Yes, your intuition will be flawed. Welcome to the club! I have a
> dozen bad ideas a day and so does every other mathematician. ... The real
> difference between you and more experienced mathematicians is that we've seen
> a lot more ways that we can fool ourselves. ... As you do more mathematics,
> you will literally get smarter. Your logical reasoning will become tighter,
> and you will begin to develop a mathematical "nose." You will learn to be
> suspicious, to sense that some important details have been glossed over. So
> let that happen.

So with that understanding: how might we write a syllabus (and in doing so,
organize a course) if it were modeled on WHS's Art 1 rather than its current
model? Here's my attempt:

## Syllabus for High School Math 1

**Purpose:** High School Math 1 is a course that provides an introduction to
mathematical reasoning through a multi-topic experience. Students will learn
and apply the principles of argument to produce creative, aesthetically
pleasing proofs that reflect their understanding of mathematical patterns.

**Materials:** You will only need a pencil, eraser, and your creative mind.

**Daily Expectations:** My expectations of students are that they use their
class time wisely and work on the project at hand. They should be open to the
critiques and ideas of their fellow classmates, with whom they will discuss
their proofs and conjectures. 

**Grading:** Your grade in math will come from the following:
 - Your finished pieces of work (portfolio) and how they reflect the principles of argument
 - Originality of your work (collaboration allowed)
 - Creativity of your work
 - Being neat and careful
 - Using your class time wisely
 - Going above and beyond the questions presented in class (forming your own questions)
 - Using your abilities to the fullest

**Philosophy:** 
 - Provide the opportunity to learn and understand the principles of beautiful arguments.
 - Provide the opportunity to explore a variety of mathematical topics.
 - Provide the opportunity to critique and be critiqued in a constructive manner.
 - Provide an atmosphere where mistakes are common, and over time  develop a sense of neatness and carefulness (make a mess, and revise, revise, revise!).
 - Provide the opportunity to be free and creative.

As you can see, I did little beside change the art-specific words to
math-specific ones and add some words on discussion, critique, and learning
from mistakes.

As wonderful as this sounds to me, I can already hear the protests. How can we
just let students sit around and daydream about patterns? There are some basic
things they just need to know and be taught! 

Well, Art 1 is not without lecture or instruction. The syllabus has a long
list of topics relating to line, texture, shape, perspective, color, that are
driven by example (drawing a paper bag for texture, etc.). Math teachers will
produce their own curriculum in much the same way: showcasing beautiful
arguments and using them as a platform to discuss technique that students can
use in their own compositions. After all, a teacher who has studied
mathematics for at least eight years must certainly have a whole treasure
trove of puzzles, paradoxes, and favorite proofs to share. If not (if a
teacher has little or no experience reading, critiquing, or creating original
mathematics), then I question whether they're fit to teach. Was there ever a
high school art teacher without a few dozen favorite works of art or who has
never painted an original piece? I'm not talking about *important*
mathematics, mind you. It can be totally insignificant! But a teacher who has
never even come up with their own question and tried to answer it cannot
expect to teach such modes of thinking. Just as a music teacher who has never
hummed an original tune cannot expect to teach improvisational jazz.

It doesn't take years of experience to start doing original mathematics, and
I've seen many students go from a general disinterest in mathematics to
conjecturing and attempting proofs over the course of an hour. How is it that
I see so many bright young students get interested in mathematics so quickly?
It's not a bugle trumpeting my own teaching accomplishments but a testament to
the universal appeal of mathematical inquiry. 

I can further imagine the argument that mathematical ability is too variable
to have everyone go through such a course. But even if you really mean that
with respect to the sort of mathematical ability I describe (conjecture and
proof, to which again I'd argue almost no students have experience), then it's
still no different from any other subject. Some students unavoidably have more
experience in writing or dance or science and that's okay. The same problem
even plagues Art 1 (if you believe "some people just can't draw"), and art
teachers readily compensate for it! Why can't we do the same thing for
mathematics?

One might question: how can we expect mere students who are supposed to enter
knowing nothing about mathematics, to craft deep logical arguments, to debate
intelligently, and to discover beauty in mathematics? Again, we already do
exactly this for almost every single subject! Students are regularly expected
to fashion arguments in essays, to comprehend some depth in literature and art,
and to understand and debate the politics of governments throughout history.
But more to the point, a student's first few years of proofs are guaranteed be
trivial to a seasoned mathematician just as a high school debate team is
nothing in comparison to the Supreme Court. But to constrain their mathematical
education from a blanket assumption that important mathematics is beyond their
abilities is as insulting and illogical as refusing to teach them to write
because they will not become a Hemingway. The point of a mathematics education
is to learn to think critically and reason, not to prepare you for a Fields
Medal. 

And what about standards? And preparing the students for college calculus?
Every math professor in college already knows that the students coming into
freshman calculus can hardly do algebra. As a teacher of these same students, I
would trade their shaky hold on algebra for even a single year of developing
critical thinking skills. The truth is that you can learn algebra and calculus
exponentially faster once you have the critical thinking part chugging away.
And maybe in a world like I propose we wouldn't have to make college calculus
so gruelingly awful either.

I'm not demanding a sweeping reform to make all mathematics education like
this. That's not feasible and would likely be implemented just as poorly as
current mathematics standards are. I understand that we need to be sensitive to
the students and the learning environment.

No, I did this thought experiment so that readers might question the
assumptions of the current establishment. Such experiments are exactly what
mathematically-minded folks do with any problem: assume some hypothesis is true
(mathematics is treated like a fine art), and poke it to see what can happen. I
like the outcome, and even if I (a hypothetical high school math teacher using
the standard pre-calculus syllabus) couldn't make mathematics a fine art
officially, I would definitely reconsider my course organization. Because that
is the kind of education I want for my kids, where they're not fearful and
loathsome of something that isn't math, but rather have enough control of their
own mathematical destiny to grow and truly learn.

Have other ideas (critiques, suggestions, counterexamples) you think I should
hear? Find me on Twitter
[@MathProgramming](https://twitter.com/MathProgramming). 
