# I want to do a lot. Here are the ways I try.

2015-02-15

I have a wide range of interests. Professionally, I am a mathematician and a
computer scientist. This already gives a lifetime of topics of interest; there
is far more math than time to understand it all. On top of that I’ve been an
avid blogger for almost four years, blogging about my research and other
technical topics of comparably cursory interest. I post articles roughly once a
week that average about 2,000 words.

But even beyond work I have tons of interests. Artistically, I enjoy art
museums, playing various musical instruments, poetry slams, writing stories and
reading stories to an audience of friends. I’ve also started learning to draw
and paint in the last year. Physically, I like rock climbing and ultimate
frisbee. For solo entertainment I love certain TV shows and I play a few
strategy video games. For group entertainment my favorite thing to do is play
indie board and card games. I’m also in the middle of planning my wedding.

My colleagues have expressed wonder at how I can be so productive. It seems
really productive, for sure, when I’m also publishing papers and giving talks
and traveling to conferences. But even so, I don’t feel super productive. My
productivity mostly seems to follow from some accountability tricks I use and
some of my more introverted personality traits.

The first trick is that I publicly document what I do in some way. I get the
results of my labor out there, and keep a sort of track record for myself. Here
are the examples. In addition to publishing research I blog regularly about it,
and on the same blog I write about any technical topic that I get interested
in. Even when I don’t blog about a new topic, I commit myself to giving talks
in a seminar I run that fulfill a similar purpose. For writing, I have read
every complete story I have ever written at a story-reading (not that many),
and I have even performed at a poetry slam. My two pieces were about math and
programming, and by sheer luck one guy in the front row totally understood both
of them. For drawing/painting, I take pictures of everything I make and post
them on Facebook and put the good ones up in my home.

These “track records” aren’t continuous. I don’t pretend to draw every day, or
even to do research every day, and I certainly don’t keep track of productivity
streaks. But they’re deeply embedded in my life. So if I go for a month without
drawing anything, I get reminded by the drawings on my walls and that motivates
me to sit down and do something new. It also helps that these are small scale
activities. Saying, “I’m going to learn the content of this business class in
the next two months” sounds naive and overreaching to me. My goals are “find
two hours this week to sit down and draw a picture of that teapot,” and,
“finish a blog post about anything by Monday.” Once I get into the swing of
things I find myself not wanting to stop and usually get more done than I
intended. But I don’t force myself. I don’t need to block off weeks of my life
to practice and make progress. I just need to be deliberate about focusing on
my weak points, whether it’s learning to mix color or understanding some facet
of computational complexity theory.

The second trick is to focus my leisure activities on something useful. When I
blog for fun, I blog to learn about new concepts in mathematics that I think
may be useful in my future research or to document neat techniques to remind
myself about later. Similarly, I may recognize in my research that my
probability skills are weak, so to buff them up I write blog posts about the
methods I need to work on and theorems I need to internalize. Also for blog
posts, as well as when I write opinion pieces like this one, I practice my
writing skills and build up a reputation. However small my reputation may be,
it grows a little bit larger every time I publish something. Creative writing
and story telling have indirect but obvious applications to writing research
papers; every good research paper tells a story. I even want to start a podcast
where I interview famous theoretical computer science researchers, with the
hidden goal of learning more deeply about their work and opening a dialogue.
Again, this has a component of public display to it.

My other pursuits like drawing, rock climbing, or gaming have no clear
relevance. But I still lean toward activities that involve puzzles, strategy,
exploration, and creativity. I think they’re more fun, particularly because
they exercise different kinds of creative skills. You will never find me
running on a treadmill or watching trashy television. That stuff is inherently
boring to me and I can replace the end goal (exercise or relaxation) with more
productive alternatives. I want to feel like I’m accomplishing or developing a
new understanding of something. That being said, if I only do leisure
activities for too long I feel like a lazy turd.

A third trick I use is to procrastinate by doing important things. That is, if
I have a crucial hard deadline coming up and I’m just not in the mood to work
toward it, I justify my procrastination by doing things that are just a little
bit less important and more conducive to my mood. The best time to learn a new
skill is when you’re not supposed to. To delay editing a paper draft I’ll learn
some new math thing or prepare a talk. When I misplace myself in the audience
of a boring/irrelevant talk I will blog or do some little research computations
in my notebook. My philosophy is that you can’t spend all your time doing
important work, but you can always find something productive to do that you
enjoy chipping away at. As a result, I have many partially completed projects,
but I find plenty of time to work on them until they get finished. Pairing this
with documenting what I do means few of these projects slip into oblivion.

One skill that I have been consciously cultivating for the last six or so years
are my interpersonal skills. Many people might not feel like this is a skill to
cultivate, but I really need it. I was always a bit of a clown, but I flailed
at actually developing strong relationships with people. I never liked big
parties, I turn off at noisy events like concerts and sports games, and I still
struggle with small talk (it’s exhausting!). I just get bored. And it becomes a
big problem when interacting with extended family who genuinely enjoy watching
a football game and chit-chatting about nothing. Maybe it’s part of my
personality that I enjoy productive activities. But rather than recede into my
own head, I force myself to practice engaging in these social situations. I
don’t become (or pretend to be) a sports fan, but I try to latch on to the bits
of conversation I can contribute to and find new ways to contribute. You see,
for me improving my social skills is a productive endeavor, so I weight it with
comparable importance to math blogging and programming. I don’t think about
it so explicitly, but it’s there. It often manifests itself with board game
nights, hosting guests, and building up a repertoire of conversation
“games” I use when I run out of small talk steam. I even took Alex
Blumberg’s online class at CreativeLive about storytelling for podcasts,
and I found the interview techniques fascinating and applicable to regular
conversations.

A fourth trick that is a variation on that theme: orient social and family time
around productive things. Want to learn to make art? Take your spouse to an art
studio for lessons. My fiancee and I share some of our best experiences at
painting classes or the rock climbing gym. Scrabble is the de facto activity I
use to spend evening time with my mother and gives us easy small talk. During
every Summer internship I ever had, I started a weekly intern frisbee game to
double as exercise and getting to know people. I have to make a point of
regularly scheduling events with friends, because otherwise I will happily stay
inside with my other pursuits. So I invite people over, provide snacks and
paint or a board game, and have learned how to keep a conversation going.

One big caveat of all this is that I don’t have children. I imagine that if and
when I have my first child that will change my productivity in a huge way. But
that being said, I hope to apply some of my tricks to raising a child. For
example, I often see couples bring their children to their climbing gym.

So these are some of the tricks I use. I should also emphasize that I wasn’t
always this way. As a teen I played far more video games than I should have, I
had the same apathy for learning new things as most of my classmates. It took
me until late high school to discover that when I put the results of my routine
work and play out there for others to see, that motivates me to put genuine
effort into it and it suddenly becomes much more rewarding. And if the
reception is negative, I develop the last skill of being receptive to criticism
and not sweating the small stuff.
